---
layout: post
title: Pow Pow - SPOJ
tags: [programming, number theory, fast exponentiation, modular multiplicative inverse, fermat's little theorem, spoj, cpp]
author_name: Kevin Bello
author_uri: http://twitter.com/keffbello
categories: [postk]
---

[Link to problem][64d05c1c]

[64d05c1c]: http://www.spoj.com/problems/POWPOW/ "PowPow"

**Overview:** The problem asks us to calculate the following expression: $$ a^{exp^b} \pmod m $$ where $$  0 \le a,b \le 10^5 $$, $$ exp = \sum_{i=0}^n \binom{n}{i}^2 $$, $$ 0 \le n \le 10^5 $$ and $$ m = 10^9 + 7 $$. The three integers $$ a,b,n $$ are given as input.

A naive solution is clearly infeasible, so in order to make the problem simpler we need to think about how to manage the sum of squares of the binomial coefficients. Doing a couple of modifications to $$ exp $$ we get $$ exp = \sum_{i=0}^n \binom{n}{i}^2 = \sum_{i=0}^n \binom{n}{i} * \binom{n}{i} = \sum_{i=0}^n \binom{n}{i} * \binom{n}{n-i} $$. Now, we can give a meaning to this last expression as "the sum of the number of ways to have $$i$$ elements from a first group of $$n$$ elements and to have $$n-i$$ elements from a second group of $$n$$ elements". Interestingly, it is equal to "choose $$n$$ elements from a group of $$2n$$ elements". So we reduced $$exp$$ to be equal to $$ \binom{2n}{n} $$. At this point the problem is not solved yet, we need a couple of additional insights.

So far what we have to calculate has reduced to $$ a^{\binom{2n}{n}^b} \pmod m $$, here we need to realize that $$ m $$ is prime and therefore we can make use of [Fermat's little theorem][Fermatlt] to get the answer. Applying Fermat's little theorem will result in calculating $$ a^E \pmod m $$ where $$ E = \binom{2n}{n}^b \pmod {m-1} = \left [\binom{2n}{n} \pmod {m-1} \right ]^b \pmod {m-1} $$. To calculate $$ E $$ we might want to use Fermat's theorem again; however, $$ m-1 $$ is no longer a prime number.

<!--more-->

Nonetheless, $$ \binom{2n}{n} = 2 * \binom{2n-1}{n} $$ and $$ m-1 = 2*p  $$ where $$ p $$ fortunately is a prime number. Thus we have $$ E = \left (2*R \right )^b \pmod {m-1} $$ and $$ R = \binom{2n-1}{n} \pmod p $$. The expression $$ R $$ can be calculated almost linearly in time complexity by using dynamic programming and the [modular multiplicative inverse][mmi]. Finally, we need to use a [fast exponentiation][fe] algorithm to quickly calculate the expressions. As the $$ R $$ expression is calculated and stored before getting the input values, the time complexity per case is $$ O(\log m + \log b) = O(\log m) $$ thus being able to pass the time constraint.

Source code in C++:

{% highlight cpp linenos %}
#include <cstdio>
#include <cstdlib>
#include <cmath>
#include <algorithm>

using namespace std;

#define REP(i,a,b) 	for(int i=a;i<(int)b;i++)
#define mod 1000000007

typedef long long ll;

ll inv(ll a, ll b, ll &x, ll &y){
	if(b==0){
		x = 1; y = 0;
		return a;
	}
	ll x1,y1;
	ll g = inv(b,a%b,x1,y1);
	x = y1;
	y = x1 - (a/b)*y1 ;
	return g;
}

ll fast(ll b,ll e,ll m){
	ll ans = 1;
	while(e){
     if(e&1) ans = (ans*b)%m;
     b = (b*b)%m;
     e>>=1;
	}
	return ans;
}

ll C[100004];
const ll N = (mod - 1)/2;

int main(){
	int cases;
	scanf("%d",&cases);
	C[1] = 1;
	ll x,y;

	for(ll i=2; i < 100004; i++){
      C[i] = ((2*i-1) * 2 * C[i-1])%N;
      inv(i,N,x,y);
      C[i] = (C[i] * x )%N;
	}
	REP(ii,0,cases){
      ll a,b,n;
      scanf("%lld %lld %lld",&a,&b,&n);
      ll exp = C[n] * 2;
      ll exp1 = (fast(exp,b,mod-1) + mod-1)%(mod-1);
      printf("%lld\n",(fast(a,exp1,mod) + mod)%mod);
	}
  return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

[Fermatlt]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermat%27s_little_theorem
[mmi]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modular_multiplicative_inverse
[fe]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponentiation_by_squaring
